## Topics for impromptu speeches

+ The coming of the MOOCS has led to many predictions about the future of education, especially the higher education. One prediction is: in future, all students will have equal access to the best education through online courses given by the best professors. It is predicted that most of the universities will close down and the majority of the professors will become teaching assistants, or lose their jobs. However, it will be a blessing for students because they will all enjoy the same opportunity to study for world-class degrees. That is progress and that is the future of higher education! What do you think about this prediction? Why?

+ In such a world of drastic change and rapid development in every field of our life, why the classics are still being cherished and read?

+ In A Short History of Chinese Philosophy, Fung Yu-lan describes the purpose of the study of philosophy as "to enable a man, as a man, to be a man, not some particular kind of man". What is your understanding of his idea?

+ The skill at unmasking error, or simple intellectual one-upmanship, is not completely without value, but we should be wary of creating a class of self-satisfied debunkers or, to use a currently fashionable word on campuses, people who like to "trouble" ideas. In overdeveloping the capacity to show how texts, institutions, or people fail to accomplish what they set out to do, we may be depriving students of the capacity to learn as much as possible from what they study. In a humanities culture in which being smart often means being a critical unmasker, our students may become too good at showing how things don't make sense. That very skill may diminish their capacity to find or create meaning and direction in the books they read and the world in which they live. Once outside the university, our students continue to score points by displaying the critical prowess for which they were rewarded in school. They wind up contributing to a cultural climate that has little tolerance for finding or making meaning, whose intellectuals and cultural commentators delight in being able to show that somebody else is not to be believed. What is your understanding of this passage?

+ Some people say that the superabundance of information is devaluing knowledge. Do you agree? Why?
